=head1 NAME

sshping - measure character-echo latency and bandwidth for an interactive ssh session

=head1 SYNOPSIS

sshping [options] [user@]addr[:port]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<sshping> is an SSH-based ping-like utility that measures interactive character echo latency
and file transfer upload/download throughput.  It's pronounced "shipping".

=head1 PARAMETERS

user
    Username for the login to the remote system.
    If omitted, it defaults to the current username on the
    local system.

addr
    IP name or address of the target system.

port
    tcp port number for the ssh daemon on the target system.
    This must be a number, service names like "ssh" are not supported.
    Default is 22.

=head1 OPTIONS

Short and long forms of options take the same arguments as shown.

-b, --bindaddr IP
    Bind to this source address

-c, --count NCHARS
    Number of characters to echo, default 1000

-d, --delimited
    Use delimiters in big numbers, e.g. 1,234,567

-e, --echocmd CMD
    Use CMD for echo command; default: cat > /dev/null
    For the character echo test, this command is issued to the
    remote system (sshping adds the newline) so that anything
    "typed" is echoed back.

-f, --config-file F
    Read and parse the ssh configuration file F for options.
    Depending upon which version of libssh you have, you may not
    see any error if the file F is missing or had bad syntax.
    You should check for the existance of file F in your script
    before passing it here.
    See ssh_config(5) for details of the file's contents.
    Default is ~/.ssh/config.

-h, --help
    Print usage and exit

-H, --human-readable
    Use flesh-friendly units

-i, --identity FILE
    Identity file, ie ssh private keyfile

-p, --password PWD
    Use password PWD (can be seen, use with care)

-P, --ping-summary
    Append measurements in ping-like round-trip-time line format, e.g.
    rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 1.371/2.095/2.505/0.389 ms

-r, --runtests e|s
    Run these tests e=echo s=speed; default es=both

-s, --size MB
    For transfer speed test (the scp test), send/receive MB
    megabytes; default=8 MB

-t, --time SECS
    Time limit for echo test.  We'll stop the test soon after
    this number of seconds, or the --couont number of characters,
    whichever comes first.
    Timing starts after the ssh login and shell creation.

-v, --verbose
    Show more output, use twice for lots: -vv

-z, --remote FILE
    Path and name of a remote file that we can write to, for the
    upload test; and that we will read back, for the download test.
    The default is to create the 1MB dummy file /tmp/sshping-PID.tmp
    and repreatedly transfer that file --size times.

=head1 OUTPUT FIELDS

=head2 Connection

ssh-Login-Time
    Time in nanoseconds to establish the tcp network connection,
    authenticate, and form the ssh session, then start an ssh
    channel, launch a remote shell, login to the remote system
    and read back any logon banners.

    If an interactive password is needed to login, the time to supply
    the password is included as well - so type fast!

=head2 Character Echo Tests

The I<character echo test> issues a single byte to the remote system,
then waits for it to be echoed back.  It checks that the returned character
is correct, then notes the wallclock time elapsed for the round-trip.
This is repeated with a different character until either the test time limit
is expired or the character count limit is reached.

Since only a subset of the printable ASCII character set is used,
bytes == characters.

Minimum-Latency
    Fastest (lowest) round-trip time for a character echo,
    in nanoseconds.

Median-Latency
    The median round-trip time for a character echo.  The median is
    not the same as the average; think of this as the "typical"
    latency.  You probably want this number when you think average.

Average-Latency
    The average (mean) round-trip time for a character echo,
    in nanoseconds.

Average-Deviation
    The standard deviation on the average latency.  It quantifies
    how varied the latency is for each character's echo.  A lower
    number indicates a tighter grouping of latencies, a
    higher number indicates more variation in the latencies.
    "One" standard deviation is the average plus or minus this amount.

Maximum-Latency
    The slowest (highest) round-trip time for a character echo,
    in nanoseconds.

Echo-Count
    The number of bytes echoed during the test.

=head2 Transfer Speed Test

The file transfer I<speed test> measures the upload and
download throughput rate, in bytes per second (Bps),
using the scp subsystem.  This is the subsystem typically used
when copying files over ssh.

For the upload test, a random 1MB file is copied to
the target system ("uploads" it), measuring the time required
for the transfer.  The file is repeatedly copied to get transfer
sizes greater than 1MB as given by --size.  By default the
target file is /tmp/sshping-PID.tmp but this can be changed
with --remote.

For the download test, the file just-uploaded is copied
down repeatedly, 1MB at a time, as-if it were separate files
to simulate downloading multiple files.  The --size value
again is used to determine the number of copies pulled.

Upload-Size
    Number of bytes uploaded during the test.

Upload-Rate
    Throughput speed for the upload transfer, in Bytes/second.

Download-Size
    Number of bytes downloaded during the test.

Download-Rate
    Throughput speed for the download transfer, in Bytes/second.


=head1 EXAMPLES

    # bin/sshping -d cheyenne.example.com
    ssh-Login-Time:      1,835,377,610 ns
    Minimum-Latency:           548,993 ns
    Median-Latency:            698,494 ns
    Average-Latency:           704,123 ns
    Average-Deviation:          72,839 ns
    Maximum-Latency:         1,075,017 ns
    Echo-Count:                  1,000 B
    Upload-Size:             8,000,000 B
    Upload-Rate:             9,371,579 B/s
    Download-Size:           8,000,000 B
    Download-Rate:           5,493,034 B/s

=head1 AUTHOR

Written by Uncle Spook.  https://github.com/spook/sshping

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2017-2019 by Uncle Spook

MIT License

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

